In this video, I'm going to show you something that's going to completely change the way you
approach improvisation. What I'm about to show you in this video is some of the trickiest and most
interesting sounding improvisational material that I think you're going to find anywhere out
there today. Here's the thing, everybody talks about how to improvise with your right hand,
which obviously is extremely important, but not enough people talk about real techniques that you
can actually learn for how to combine the hands into two hand intervallic lines. By the end of
this video, you're going to be able to not only understand, but create your own versions of things
just like this. I'm actually going to show you the coolest technique of all, probably the most
important one toward the end of the video, but the thing is you really should learn these other ones
first, so make sure you actually watch through and get to the end of the video.
So the first thing I'm going to show you, I'm calling a one plus one arpeggio. So basically
what this is, is it's one chord or one four note shape in each hand.
And what's really cool here is that when you combine the two hands, you can create these really
large scale intervallic lines that would be practically impossible to do with just one hand.
So let's say we have a B flat major seven sharp 11. Check this one out.
So here are our shapes. Left hand, three, five, one, nine. Right hand is five, one, sharp 11, five.
We do it ascending and descending.
And suddenly we can do this line that would be really difficult to do again with just one hand.
Now this is literally just one small example. So I want to actually not do the YouTuber thing where
I just show you this one thing and we walk away and now we're on to the next one. How do we actually
use this technique now beyond this one exercise? First of all, what I want you to do is practice
shifting it to other keys or other chords. So obviously you could practice this in other keys.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that.
Even right out the gate compositionally, this is already really awesome.
So cool. You can use it for a texture. But what if I wanted to make it a B flat minor chord? So
automatically, we shift this to a flat three. This already works. We didn't even have to do
anything else. Now the next thing we want to do is add a little bit of a chord. So we're going to go
to the B flat major chord. We're going to go up a little bit. We're going to add another B flat major
chord. So we're going to add a little bit of B flat major. We're going to add another B flat major.
So we're going to add another B flat major.
Then we can do descending and ascending.
Another trick I like to do is actually repeat that bottom note. So on the way up,
repeat the top note. And on the way down,
you get these really, really interesting lines and textures. And I know this is a lot. So if you want
to practice these all in sequence, I suggest you do a few of these. One of the interesting things
is, if you have a lot of keys, you can use this technique to make your notes sound more natural.
sequential order and have it all nice and organized for you. All of this is written out and you can
download it for free at the link in the description. All I will ask at that link is that you put in
your email and phone number so that every once in a while I can send you something about my original
music. I'm also an artist and I love when people actually listen to my music as well. So if you
want to support, really appreciate it and just as a thank you. All of this written out for you
for free at the link in the description. All right, back to the video. Quick summary. We take a four
note shape in each hand. In this case, B flat major 7 sharp 11 and we practice ascending,
descending. If we want to change the chord, we just change the notes we need. So in this case,
B flat minor becomes. Of course, we practice it in different keys. Let's go up a half step.
We're going to do a two hand arpeggio to go out and then come back in when you get back into your
right hand lines. And a really good example of that takes place on my own single that just came
out. It's called Annoying Cool Guy. If you want to stream it, it is on all streaming platforms and of
course, link in the description. Obviously not trying to toot my own horn, but I do think this is
a really good example. So I take a D minor chord, right? And instead what I do is D diminished major 9,
essentially.
And then on the right hand, I do a flat minor, like an A flat minor triad, and it creates this
really interesting tension, which would be pretty weird, except that I resolve it pretty quickly.
So long story short, we are pet you like that and go out and then just land back on this D minor 13
sound. So it's a really great example of how you can actually use it in the context of a solo. That
was all just on one chord.
Again, streaming on
all platforms and some streaming links in the description. So this next technique is just going
to make you so much better on so many levels. And it's going to give you some really amazing
improvisational skills and material. So we're going to do now, we're not just going to practice
this in different keys, but we're actually going to practice it in intervalically and melodically
at the same time. So this is this is already crazy stuff that I'm giving you here. This is if you
really practice this, this is already going to make you a super unique improviser.
In my opinion, so you're going to take that and then you're just going to be able to do this
completely in intervalically. So here's the step by step of how I would do this to just become an
absolute monster two hand improviser here. First, just do it normal, how you do it ascending,
descending, half steps.
So by half steps, I mean, now we move up a half step.
And again, and so on. Then I would start connecting them. So we go up, down, up, down.
How cool is that already? I mean, for me, that's that's really, really cool. I want to practice
this stuff way more. I'm giving you all some crazy secret sauce here. Now, of course, you can also do
that in other intervals. So you can do that in other intervals. So you can do that in other intervals.
You could actually practice this in minor thirds.
A little sloppy, but you get what I'm going for here. This is just one shape. Imagine if you did
this with a bunch of different shapes. This is really, really interesting stuff. Here's another
example that you might be more familiar with because this is a pretty famous voicing.
So this next exercise, I'm going to call the two-note. So this is a pretty famous voicing.
So this next exercise, I'm going to call the two-note. So this next exercise, I'm going to call the
two-note. So this next exercise, I'm going to call the two-note. So this next exercise, I'm going to call the
two-note. So this next exercise, I'm going to call the two-by-three. And the reason I'm going to call
it that is because actually, we're going to have two notes in the left hand and three in the right
hand. But here's what's interesting. Two of the notes in the right hand, you're actually going to
play together. So ultimately, it creates a four-note line or a four-note sequence. So in this
case, I'm going to do these two notes together like that. That's this arpeggio that I'm doing.
So we can do that going down and up. But the key here is actually working on playing multiple notes
at the same time. You could obviously do the same thing with the left hand. So again, we'll have
those written out for you. But now this final technique, this is what I've been saving for the
end. We already did the intervallic stuff, which was so cool. But we didn't talk about what if you
did it diatonically. So that means we're now going to limit ourselves to notes from a very
small scale. So we're going to limit ourselves to notes from a very small scale. So that means we're
going to limit ourselves to notes from a very specific scale. So if we're on an F minor chord,
right, we're going to use, let's say, F Dorian for now. So let's start with this shape here.
1-5-9-flat-3-flat-7. It's our F minor 9 shape here. What you want to be able to do
is move it through that F Dorian scale. Every note moves to the next note in that scale.
Now we can get some really interesting intervallic improvisational patterns from this. What if
instead of going linearly through the scale, we actually go like this?
And then what if we did that intervallically?
Suddenly you can get these really interesting intervallic lines that all work in F minor. So
this is some of the secret sauce that I've been working on for quite some time. I've been very
excited to leave it in a video, and it feels like there's no better time than when I just released
my first single in four years, which is called Annoying Cool Guy. If you want to check it out,
the link is in the description.
I truly appreciate you taking a listen and seeing if you like my music. If you don't,
it's all good. But if you do, please give me that follow on whatever platform you're
listening on and keep checking it out because I'm actually going to have a lot more coming
very, very soon.
All right, that is it for today's video. I hope that that was super, super helpful. This
is really tricky stuff, so don't feel like you have to nail it right off the bat. Again,
I'm hoping that you find this as interesting as I do. And again, if you want this nicely
organized in sheet music, click the link in the description.
Thanks for watching. I'll see you next time. Bye.
Sign up for my original music list where I will not spam you, but will every once in
a while send you some relevant information about if I have some new music coming out
or if I happen to be specifically in your city. Really appreciate you following my music,
my original stuff, because that is of course part of the passion of all of this. And it's
actually how and why I came up with all the exercises for this video and probably why
you're going to use them too is for, you know, the stuff that you make or the people that
you play for or the things that you compose. So yeah, really appreciate you not only checking
out my educational content, but also giving a listen and seeing if you actually like some
of what I'm writing as well. All right, y'all, thank you so much for watching. And last thing,
I know that diatonic concepts can be a little confusing, moving shapes, or out of scale,
things like that. If you actually want to go deeper on that, very step by step, very
easy to digest and understand. I actually do have some videos on that. So I'm going
to link one of those. I'll put the link in the description. And I'll see you in the next
video.
Thanks so much.